Tea part 2 - the model (#2153)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ExtensionArchitecture/Tutorials/Tea/Model.rst

by Extbase.

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_database:

The database model
==================

Let us translate this into SQL and store the schema in a file called
:file:`ext_tables.sql`:

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/ExtTablesSql.rst.txt

The image is stored as an integer. However the field :sql:`image` in the
database does not contains a reference to the image in form of an identifier.

The field :sql:`image` keeps track of the number of attached images. A separate table,
a so-called MM table, stores the actual relationship. Read about the definition
of this field here: :ref:`extbase_tutorial_tea_model_columns_image`.

..  hint::
    If you have had a look at a TYPO3 database before, you might wonder:
    What about all those special fields like :sql:`uid`, :sql:`pid`,
    :sql:`deleted`, etc? The answer is that TYPO3 will generate them automatically
    for you.

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_tca:

TCA - Table Configuration Array
===============================

The TCA tells TYPO3 about the database model. It defines all fields
containing data and all semantic fields that have a special meaning within

> TYPO3 (like the :sql:`deleted` field used, for soft deleting).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TYPO3 (like the :sql:`deleted` field which is used for soft deletion).
```

The TCA also defines how the corresponding input fields in the backend should look.

The TCA is a nested PHP array. In this example, we need the the following
keys on the first level:

> 

Reviewer: I suggest bringing ctrl/types/columns in the order as they appear on this page and link to the sections.

> :php:`ctrl`
>     Settings for the complete table, such as a record title, a label
>     for a single record, default sorting, and the names of some
>     internal fields.
> 
> :php:`types`
>     We only have one type of tea record, however it is mandatory to
>     describe at least one type. Here we define the order in which
>     the fields are displayed in the backend.
> 
> :php:`columns`
>     Here we define all fields that can be used for user input in the
>     backend.

Author: ```suggestion
:php:`ctrl`
    Settings for the complete table, such as a record title, a label
    for a single record, default sorting, and the names of some
    internal fields.
    
:php:`columns`
    Here we define all fields that can be used for user input in the
    backend.

:php:`types`
    We only have one type of tea record, however it is mandatory to
    describe at least one type. Here we define the order in which
    the fields are displayed in the backend.

```

   ]

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_ctrl_label:

:php:`label`
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :php:`label` is used as name for a specific tea record. The name is used
in listings and in backend forms:

..  figure:: /Images/ManualScreenshots/ExtensionArchitecture/Tutorials/Tea/TeaLabel.png
    :class: with-shadow

    The **label** of a tea record.

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_ctrl_others:

:php:`tstamp`, :php:`deleted`, ...
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These fields are used to keep timestamp and status information for each record. You can read more about them in the `TCA Reference, chapter ctrl <t3tca:ctrl>`.

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_columns:

TCA :php:`columns` - Defining the fields
-------------------------------------------------

All fields that can be changed in the TYPO3 backend or used in the Extbase
model have to be listed here. Otherwise they will not be recognized by TYPO3.

The :sql:`title` field is defined like this:

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Configuration/TCA/TeaColumnTitle.rst.txt

The title of the field is displayed above the input field. The type is a (string)
input field. The other configuration values influence display (size of the input

> field) and or processing on saving (:php:`'eval' => 'trim'` removes whitespace).

Reviewer: I do not understand why, but this `:php:...` is not rendered as code.

Author: I think we need a space before the double columns

> field) and or processing on saving (:php:`'eval' => 'trim'` removes whitespace).

Author: ```suggestion
field) and or processing on saving ( :php:`'eval' => 'trim'` removes whitespace).
```

lazily? Should they be deleted if this object is deleted?).

Extbase models extend the
:php:`TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\DomainObject\AbstractEntity` class.
The parent classes of this class already offer methods needed for persistence
to database, the identifier :php:`uid` etc.

.. include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Classes/Domain/Model/TeaProperties.rst.txt

..  attention::
    All properties of the model have to have the visibility keyword :php:`protected` or
    :php:`public`. :php:`private` properties are not supported, as properties have to
    be accessed by the repository and persistence and layers internally.

    If you want to prevent developers from extending you model, and
    accessing the properties of you model, you can make the class of the model
    final.

For all :php:`protected` properties we need at least a getter with the corresponding
name. If the property should be writable within Extbase, it must also
have a getter. Properties that are only set in backend forms do not
need a setter.

Example for the property :php:`title`:

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Classes/Domain/Model/TeaTitle.rst.txt

> The getter for the image also has to resolve the lazy loading:

Author: ```suggestion
The getter for the image also has to resolve the :ref:`lazy loading <extbase-annotation-lazy>`:
```

..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt

..  index::
    Tutorial Tea; Model
..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model:

===================
Model: a bag of tea
===================

> The model in this example is kept quite basic: Each tea can have a title,
> a description and optionally an image attached.

Reviewer 2: The fewer words the better.

```suggestion
We keep the model simple: Each tea can have a title, a description, and an optional image.
```

..  uml::

    class Tea {
        title
        ==
        description
        ==
        image
    }

> The title and description are strings, the image is stored as relation
> to the class :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Domain\Model\FileReference` provided

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The title and description are strings, the image is stored as a relation
to the class :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Domain\Model\FileReference`, provided
```

> The title and description are strings, the image is stored as relation
> to the class :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Domain\Model\FileReference` provided
> by Extbase as model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The title and description are strings, the image is stored as a relation
to the model class :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Domain\Model\FileReference`, provided
by Extbase.
```

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_database:

The database model
==================

> Let us translate this into SQL and store the scheme in a file called

Reviewer 2: A schema is an organizational pattern, while a scheme is more a long the lines of an intrigue. ;-)

```suggestion
Let us translate this into SQL and store the schema in a file called
```

:file:`ext_tables.sql`:

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/ExtTablesSql.rst.txt

The image is stored as an integer. However the field :sql:`image` in the
database does not contains a reference to the image in form of an identifier.

> The field :sql:`image` stores how many images are attached. A separate table,
> a so called MM table stores the actual relationship. See about the definition
> of this field here: :ref:`extbase_tutorial_tea_model_columns_image`.

Reviewer 2: This is a good point. The fact that the image field stores the number of references is also an optimization, because if there are no images, we don't have to look for them in a separate table.

Since you're saying that there is something called an MM table, you might want to say what MM stands for too. Otherwise, it's a little half-way to an explanation.

```suggestion
The field :sql:`image` keeps track of the number of attached images. A separate table,
a so-called MM table, stores the actual relationship. Read about the definition
of this field here: :ref:`extbase_tutorial_tea_model_columns_image`.
```

..  hint::

>     If you have had a look at a TYPO3 database before you might wonder:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you have had a look at a TYPO3 database before, you might wonder:
```

    What about all those special fields like :sql:`uid`, :sql:`pid`,
    :sql:`deleted` etc? The answer is TYPO3 will generate them automatically
    for you.

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_tca:

TCA - Table Configuration Array
===============================

> The TCA makes the database model known to TYPO3. It defines all fields

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCA tells TYPO3 about the database model. It defines all fields
```

containing data and all semantic fields that have a special meaning within

> TYPO3 (like the :sql:`deleted` field used for soft deleting).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TYPO3 (like the :sql:`deleted` field used, for soft deleting).
```

> TCA also defines how the input fields for the data in the backend should look
> like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCA also defines how the corresponding input fields in the backend should look.
```

> The TCA is a nested PHP array. On the first level we need the the following
> keys in this example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TCA is a nested PHP array. In this example, we need the the following
keys on the first level:
```

:php:`ctrl`

>     Settings for the complete table, like an overall title, a lable that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Settings for the complete table, like an overall title, a label that
```

>     Settings for the complete table, like an overall title, a lable that
>     should specify the single object, default sorting and the names of some
>     fields used internally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Settings for the complete table, such as a record title, a label
    for a single record, default sorting, and the names of some
    internal fields.
```

:php:`types`
    We only have one type of tea record, however it is mandatory to
    describe at least one type. Here we define the order in which
    the fields are displayed in the backend.

:php:`columns`
    Here we define all fields that can be used for user input in the

>     backend.

Reviewer 2: I think for example EXT:news also defines the pid field here.

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_ctrl:

TCA :php:`ctrl` - Settings for the complete table
-------------------------------------------------

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Configuration/TCA/TeaCtrl.rst.txt

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_ctrl_title:

:php:`title`
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Defines the title used when we are talking about the table in the backend.
It will be displayed on top of the list view of records in the backend
and in backend forms.

..  figure:: /Images/ManualScreenshots/ExtensionArchitecture/Tutorials/Tea/TeaTitle.png
    :class: with-shadow

>     The **title** of the table tea

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The **title** of the :sql:`tea` table.
```

> Strings starting with :php:`LLL:` will be localized. See chapter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Strings starting with :php:`LLL:` will be replaced with localized text. See chapter
```

:ref:`Extension localization <extension_localization>`. All other strings

> would be output as strings. You could also write:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will be output as they are. You can also write:
```

.. code-block:: php
   :caption: EXT:tea/Configuration/TCA/tx_tea_domain_model_product_tea.php

   [
       'ctrl' => [
           'title' => 'Tea',
       ],
   ]

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_ctrl_label:

:php:`label`
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The :php:`label` is used as name for a specific tea record. The name is used
> in listings, dropdown fields used to reference a tea record and in the forms
> for editing records in the backend:

Reviewer 2: This is shorter, but says about the same thing. Dropdowns are also lists, and they're also in backend forms.

```suggestion
The :php:`label` is used as name for a specific tea record. The name is used
in listings and in backend forms:
```

..  figure:: /Images/ManualScreenshots/ExtensionArchitecture/Tutorials/Tea/TeaLabel.png
    :class: with-shadow

    The **label** of a tea record. Yeah, sorry, Coffee is my tea...

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_ctrl_others:

:php:`tstamp`, :php:`deleted`, ...
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> These fields are used for different aspects of handling tables. You can read in
> depth in the `TCA Reference, chapter ctrl <t3tca:ctrl>` about what they mean and
> are used for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These fields are used to keep timestamp and status information for each record. You can read more about them in the `TCA Reference, chapter ctrl <t3tca:ctrl>`.
```

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_columns:

> TCA :php:`columns` - Defining the database fields

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking it's "table fields", but I think it's enough to just say "fields". I would leave out "database", as that word has a larger scope.

```suggestion
TCA :php:`columns` - Defining the fields
```

-------------------------------------------------

All fields that can be changed in the TYPO3 backend or used in the Extbase

> model have to be listed here. Otherwise they will not be recognized by
> any API call to the table.

Reviewer 2: There are APIs that don't care about the TCA, but TYPO3's backend won't recognize and display the fields unless you mention them here.

```suggestion
model have to be listed here. Otherwise they will not be recognized by TYPO3.
```

> The title input field is defined like that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :sql:`title` field is defined like this:
```

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Configuration/TCA/TeaColumnTitle.rst.txt

The title of the field is displayed above the input field. The type is a (string)
input field. The other configuration values influence display (size of the input
field) and or processing on saving (:php:`'eval' => 'trim' removes whitespace).

You can find a complete list of available input types and their propererties in

> the :`TCA Reference, chapter "Field types (config > type)" <t3tca:columns-types>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `TCA Reference, chapter "Field types (config > type)" <t3tca:columns-types>`.
```

> The other text fields are defined in a similar matter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The other text fields are defined in a similar manner.
```

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_columns_image:

The :php:`image` field
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The image field is a special case as it is created by a call to the API function
> :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::getFileFieldTCAConfig()`.
> This method returns a readily configured array in accordance to what the current
> TYPO3 version needs. It also saves you from writing a long and complicated array.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The image field is a special case, as it is created by a call to the API function
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::getFileFieldTCAConfig()`.
This method returns a preconfigured array, and saves you from writing a long and complicated configuration array.
```

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: EXT:tea/Configuration/TCA/tx_tea_domain_model_product_tea.php

    [
        'columns' => [
            'image' => [
                'label' => 'LLL:EXT:tea/Resources/Private/Language/locallang_db.xlf:tx_tea_domain_model_product_tea.image',
                'config' => \TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\ExtensionManagementUtility::getFileFieldTCAConfig(
                    'image',
                    [
                        'maxitems' => 1,
                        'appearance' => [
                            'collapseAll' => true,
                            'useSortable' => false,
                            'enabledControls' => [
                                'hide' => false,
                            ],
                        ],
                    ]
                ),
            ],
        ],
    ];

..  tip::
    Do not worry about performance caused by the API call, the TCA files are
    cached in compiled form.

The array generated by the method

> :php:`ExtensionManagementUtility::getFileFieldTCAConfig()` looks like that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:php:`ExtensionManagementUtility::getFileFieldTCAConfig()` looks like this:
```

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Configuration/TCA/TeaColumnImage.rst.txt

> Now are you happy this was brewed for you and you did not have to type it
> yourself?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You are probably happy that this was generated for you and that you did not have to type it
yourself.
```

..  _extbase_tutorial_tea_model_types:

TCA :php:`types` - Configure the input form
-------------------------------------------

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Configuration/TCA/TeaTypes.rst.txt

The key :php:`showitem` lists all fields that should be displayed in the

> backend input form in the order they should be displayed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
backend input form, in the order they should be displayed.
```

..  hint::

>     It is possible to influence the display of the fields in more sophisticated
>     ways: You can order them in tabs, put them into palettes etc. See

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    There are more sophisticated ways to influence how the fields are displayed:
    You can order them in tabs, put them into palettes etc. See
```

    :ref:`TCA reference, showitem <t3tca:types-properties-showitem>` for
    details.

Result - the complete TCA
--------------------------

Have a look at the complete file
`EXT:tea/Configuration/TCA/tx_tea_domain_model_product_tea.php <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/tea/blob/main/Configuration/TCA/tx_tea_domain_model_product_tea.php>`__.

> The edit form for tea records in the backend now looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now the edit form for tea records will look like this:
```

..  figure:: /Images/ManualScreenshots/ExtensionArchitecture/Tutorials/Tea/TeaEditForm.png
    :class: with-shadow

>     The complete input form for a tea record

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The complete input form for a tea record.
```

The list of teas in the module :guilabel:`Web -> List` looks like this:

..  figure:: /Images/ManualScreenshots/ExtensionArchitecture/Tutorials/Tea/TeaList.png
    :class: with-shadow

>     A list of teas in the backend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A list of teas in the backend.
```

..  note::
    Up to this point we have only used TYPO3 Core features. You can create
    tables and backend forms exactly the same way without using Extbase.

The Extbase model
=================

> It is a common practice - though not mandatory - to use PHP class to store the

Reviewer 2: Classes are the schema, objects represent the individual records.

```suggestion
It is a common practice — though not mandatory — to use PHP objects to store the
```

data while working on it.

> The model is an additional abstraction from the database. It enables the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The model is a more abstract representation of the database schema. It enables the
```

> The model is an additional abstraction from the database. It enables the
> developer to require variable types beyond what the database abstraction layer
> offers. The model can also be used to apply validators to the properties
> of the model and to specify relationship types (should relatives be loaded
> lazily? Should they be deleted if this object is deleted?).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The model is a more abstract representation of the database schema. It provides more advanced data types, way beyond what the database itself can offer. The model can also be used to define validators for the model properties
and to specify relationship types and rules (should relations be loaded
lazily? Should they be deleted if this object is deleted?).
```

> Extbase models extend the class
> :php:`TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\DomainObject\AbstractEntity` provided by Extbase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Extbase models extend the
:php:`TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\DomainObject\AbstractEntity` class.
```

> The parent classes of this class already offer methods needed for persistence in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The parent classes of this class already offer methods needed for persistence
```

> to database, accessing the identifier :php:`uid` etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to database, the identifier :php:`uid` etc.
```

.. include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Classes/Domain/Model/TeaProperties.rst.txt

..  attention::

>     All properties of the model have to have the modifier :php:`protected` or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    All properties of the model have to have the visibility keyword :php:`protected` or
```

>     :php:`public`. :php:`private` properties are not supported as properties have to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    :php:`public`. :php:`private` properties are not supported, as properties have to
```

    be accessed by the repository and persistence and layers internally.

>     If you want to prevent developers from extending you model, and though

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you want to prevent developers from extending you model, and
```

    accessing the properties of you model, you can make the class of the model
    final.

> For all :php:`protected` properties we need at least a getter of the according
> name. If the property should be writable within the Extbase workflows it also
> has to have a getter. Properties that are only set in the backend forms do not
> need a setter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all :php:`protected` properties we need at least a getter with the corresponding
name. If the property should be writable within Extbase, it must also
have a getter. Properties that are only set in backend forms do not
need a setter.
```

Example for the property :php:`title`:

..  include:: /CodeSnippets/Tutorials/Tea/Classes/Domain/Model/TeaTitle.rst.txt

> The getter for the image also has to resolve the lazy loading:

Reviewer 2: You haven't described lazy loading on this page. Maybe a good idea to add a description of it further up.
